Okay, you ready? Comfortable?
Yes, I'm fine.
Again, you can talk to myself or the camera is totally up to you.
However, you are comfortable. Do you want a glass of water or anything?
No, no, I'm fine. Yes, I'm fine.
So, first is up.
What do you... Can you first of all give me your name?
Yeah, my name is...
And where you were born?
My name is Musharraf Hussein.
I was born in Pakistan.
My date of birth is 1950.
But on my passport, I'm 1949.
And I educated in my own country. I did GCSE.
I belonged to a middle class family.
But all my family is very educated.
My brothers, sisters, everyone, they're all professionals.
I came through...
I had a good life in school and I've been in a college as well.
You know, back home.
Let's talk about some of that then.
Right, yeah.
Do you remember what your childhood in Pakistan was like?
It was... It was all time. It was very good.
At first we were very free. There was no restrictions.
We played with the boys. We played with the girls.
We went out. We played in the house.
We went to the village.
You know, we did all sort of things.
What was the enjoyment that time was available.
We did all that. All that.
What was it like for you to grow up there?
What kind of fond memories do you have?
It wasn't... We belonged to a very religious family.
It was average.
We used to do everything in Ramadan.
We used to have our fasting.
And we used to pray in the morning and pray at night.
And when we were in school, my mum was very strict.
And we got to do everything on time.
We got to do our homework.
We got to do some religious study.
We got to do housework and school and college.
Whatever was available and shared with the family.
I always belonged to that.
We were eight members, eight brothers and sisters in the family.
And my mum and dad.
My dad was an engineer in the biscuit factory.
Back home, Pakistan.
My dad was an engineer.
And my mum was a housewife.
She brought us very, very well.
In a very good way and in discipline.
We wasn't left out for a while.
What part of Pakistan is this?
That time we lived in Sahiwal.
That was near Lahore.
It was between Lahore and Multan.
Do you remember school?
Yes.
What education?
I was in a pilot school.
I educated in a pilot school.
There was an English medium.
It was all Urdu.
After class five, like you can say eleven,
and then we learned English as a subject.
But before that, it was all Urdu medium.
We used to have a math area, we used to have science, we got social studies, you know, all that.
But that was in our own language.
Did you have a favourite subject?
Or one?
I can't remember now.
It's a long time.
How about playing?
Do you remember playing?
What did you have fun games?
Did you enjoy playing as a child?
Yes.
I used to play all with the families, but not in a school.
I didn't play anything in school, no.
I wasn't.
What kind of games did you play?
What did you do to pass the time as a child?
Eh, brother and sister, you know, you just sit and play Ludo, and we play hide and seek.
You know, just small plays that time.
The media wasn't there, no gadgets, nothing.
We hardly had, when we were little, we never even had a TV that time.
TV came long time after.
But we just played with the kids, like, you know, dolls and, you know, small things like, you know.
So how about for celebrations, birthdays and weddings?
What did you do? Tell me about some of those.
Tell me about some of those.
We never, no, we never used to have any birthdays.
No, we never.
But we used to have a celebration.
We had an Eid, and we had weddings, and we used to dress up and go accordingly.
What the people used to do, you know, we just go and just mix with them, and do the things like, you know.
But actually, I was little, and I don't remember those sort of things, but it wasn't, that time, it wasn't very advanced.
You know, it was, people had limited money and limited sources as well.
Just the same as everybody, you know, that time.
And that is my sixties, like, you know.
You mentioned you pray in the morning, pray at night.
That's right, yeah.
What are the traditions or practices, family day practices, do you remember?
Do you remember any family day activities when maybe Dan came home or when there was a wedding, did you do anything?
Do you remember any traditions and celebrations?
No, we didn't do much that time.
Actually, when I came to this country, I was very young.
Actually, most of us, I adopt here.
How big were you?
No, I wasn't that young, young. I was eighteen.
I married and I came to this country, I was eighteen.
Because before that, I was in a school and I was in college.
I was busy studying, so I didn't have much activities like, you know, play with the brothers and sisters in a house or play with the friends.
But it wasn't, not more than that.
So let's go there, travelling to the UK.
What made you arrive in the UK and what was it? Was it for work or study?
If it was to study, what did you carry on studying?
Actually, my husband was my friend, my brother's best friend.
And we got married. I was only eighteen when I got married.
I just finished my GCSE, you know, I was in the first year in A-levels.
And I got married and within two months, I came over here.
And the rest of the life I spent in here with my husband.
And after that, I started my family and I had my children.
Do you remember the first journey over?
How did you feel when you were coming over, were you nervous?
Crying, crying, nervous because I came from the big family.
And when I came over here, I was on my own.
I had no relatives. I didn't have no member of the family, only my husband.
I didn't know anybody at all. It was a very, very bad experience.
Very, very bad.
That time there was no telephones back home here, like, you know, not in every household.
Actually, in here, people did have the phones in every household.
We used to go to the public phone, you know, in the street to phone someone.
And there wasn't many phones that time. People were just surviving, you know, it was good like.
The phone was only ambulance call or call someone, you know, very, very, very, very less.
Most probably you wasn't born that time, you know, when we came to this country.
What year did you arrive here?
I came here 24th of February 1969.
What do you remember of the temperature, the people, the food?
Very, very cold and snow and everywhere snow, mountains and snow.
One finish, another one came. It wasn't finished, the other one was came.
Even in June and July, we used to have snow.
And in August this time, we used to have a water snow.
And we never thought about the jackets, never thought about sandals, never thought about.
There was no jackets, only different coats people used to wear.
Good, it was very, very cold weather.
And big thick shoes like with a grip.
And hats and scarves, even when my children started school.
Like in September now, like next month the kids be going to school.
And we used to buy for them, you know, duffle coat and shoes and burleys and hoodies.
You know, it was that time, you know, it wasn't no heating in the houses.
People used to burn coal.
But fortunately, my husband had an English friend.
And when they saw I, when I came, I was very young.
And my husband put me in my house. I had a gas fire.
I was lucky to have a gas fire in my house.
And I had a carpet in the room. And I had a new sofa.
But people, you know, around they come in and surprise, oh, you got a carpet in the room.
And you got a new sofa in the room.
And you know, that was a luxury life that time.
People used to have only a piece of carpet in the middle of the room.
And the people used to burn coal.
So it sounded like you had to adjust.
Yes, yes.
How did you maintain or manage connections back home then?
So was it letters? Was it a call?
Letters, letters.
Tell me a bit about how you maintained some sort of connection.
Actually, when I came, because I came from the big family.
And there was my some college friends and my school friends.
And my own two younger sisters.
And every morning when I used to wake up,
I used to run down the stairs because the bedroom was upstairs.
Run down the stairs if there's a post.
And we see a blue letter.
It was an airmail.
We used to say airmail letters, you know, the blue ones.
And come and, you know, this without wasting time,
without taking a breath, you know, open and read all about the family.
And then sit down and most of it, we read about six times in a day.
You know, just sisters and brothers missing me and telling me what happened.
So and so had a child, so and so is ill, so you know, all those sort of stories like.
And they used to write back letter.
And I was on my own.
I used to writing a letter.
I'm crying.
I go emotional about it.
And managed, managed, slowly managed.
What helped you manage?
What helped you while you were here far, far away in a cold, cold land?
What things helped you manage that process?
Was it people and places?
Actually, my husband, he was a very, very loving husband.
He cared for me a lot.
He cared anything and everything.
So even I was lonely, I wasn't feeling that bad.
I was missing my family, but he used to do anything for everything for me.
He was 10 years older than me.
But he was a very nice person.
Can you tell me about maybe life here then?
Let's say the first five to 10 years.
How did that feel?
After two years when they came after two years, I gave birth.
I had a daughter.
I came in 69, early 69 in February.
And in 70, my daughter was born.
And I was a bachelor and I got very busy as well.
But before I came, my husband had some English friends, you know, the family.
And they didn't have any children, but there was, her name was Roma.
And her husband was Teddy and was Dad.
And they used to worry, they care for me a lot.
They used to come every evening and sit with me and talk to me.
I didn't know a lot of English at all.
Nothing.
They used to come, because I was nearly married when they came.
Used to just talk.
When I was speaking, I was speaking wrong.
I didn't know anything about it.
I only read a few books like, you know, English books.
But my grammar wasn't very good.
My speech wasn't very good, you know.
And they used to come and sit by me and talk to me about this and that.
And what I used to do, when they were talking to me, I was correcting myself.
What they saying, like I said something.
I used a grammar past, but I was talking in presence.
And future, you know, so I didn't know.
But when they used to sit and talk to me, what happened?
You shut up. What you do? What you do in Pakistan?
What your sister does? What your brother does?
You know, keep me going.
And I learned.
And very quick, very soon, I start speaking.
And I became independent.
Like some people took them years and years and maybe 10 years and 20 years.
But my husband let me go.
He said, if I went, first time I went to the doctors, he went with me.
You know, registered me in.
Next time I went, I had a flu or something.
He went with me in a drug procedure.
He sat on the bench and he said, you go.
And I said, what to say? I don't know.
He said, no, you go.
Explain to him what's wrong with you.
I said, I will say something wrong.
He said, oh, Macha, you say wrong.
He will understand.
If you won't understand, then he might call me and I'll come and explain.
And very quick, I start taking my own weight on my feet.
And I had one child, two, three, four.
I had four children.
No, and my husband started a business.
I started helping him as well.
He had a shop, ladies wear fashion.
And I used to go to one place and my husband used to go to the different one.
And my kids started going to school and all that.
Slowly, I became a bit independent.
My kids grown up and I thought I must do something.
And I had some, I had a training, teachers training.
And after I became a teacher, I taught in different high school, Urdu language, the kids.
And while I was there, I became, I worked for government.
I worked for social services in a child protection team.
I worked there a few years.
And whatever I could grapple, I was doing it.
I worked in a crush a couple of years.
I did home caring.
I did fostering.
I did multi-skills.
And I started cooking and I did some catering as well.
And wherever I got a chance to learn something, I went for it.
And I did it.
And now it's all around.
Pensioner.
But I had a lot of experience in my life.
What was the UK like?
Can you remember in the 70s, 60s, 70s, what was UK like?
It was like, when you think about the Newport, I can tell about the Newport, and a bit of Cardiff.
This Newport was different altogether.
This building started in 1974.
1974, they started this building.
On the bridge there was nothing.
There was shops when it came very first.
On the bridge there was shops there all the way till the roundabout.
And where is the roundabout?
There was a lights, satellites.
And go straight and there was a high street.
There was shops there and there where the King's Head Hotel is.
I know all Newport.
The library built after, Kings were built after, and they...
You know, Kings, what they done?
They built in shops.
Long time ago there was a Tesco.
They knocked that down and they made in shops.
And after that, there's a Friar's Womb now.
Dublin was in there.
What was the... I mean, back in the 60s, 70s as well, there was more Asian people arriving?
There wasn't that many people.
There were Pakistani people, but there was very few Bengalis.
Bengali families wasn't that much.
There was a lot of Pakistani people.
And they was all from villages.
And they... they was much older than me.
Like you can say my father's age, you know.
And they was all illiterate.
They couldn't speak.
The wives couldn't speak English, not a word of English.
And the men, they all worked in the factories.
There was a girl in factories and there was...
there was a crunch and something.
There was a battery factory with that transporter bridge on the other side of that.
And there was a lice shed.
There was a quite big factory, Spencer Wigs.
And it was different altogether.
This one is all new.
But old one, I can just close my eyes and I could see what was there.
Because I seen it with my own eyes.
And I saw it alteration.
You know, they altering this one.
They demolishing this one, putting a new stuff there.
They demolishing there, putting a new stuff there.
And like that River French wasn't there.
They used to have sand ships.
They come there and they empty all sand.
And people buy sand from there, you know, for the buildings.
So you've raised four children here, is that correct?
That's right.
Yeah, so...
My children got children.
Tell me about what it's like to raise children here and how they connect to Pakistan.
Do they or how they?
Actually, it was alright.
Because I didn't have many difficulties.
I was...
How I can say?
I altered myself according to the culture.
Not in very advanced way, but where it was needed.
Where it was a good things, I adopted that.
But I didn't let adopt my kids the bad things.
And I didn't adopt the bad things.
You know, to be a Muslim.
So you got to go accordingly, like my daughters, I had two daughters.
I didn't let them go to westernize, not as now the English people are.
They wouldn't let them, the way they close, the way they were.
I wouldn't let them out like that in the evening.
No, there's a limit.
So, I mean...
Mementos and heirlooms.
Do you have mementos and heirlooms that exist from back then?
Things that you prize.
It doesn't have to be a physical thing.
Maybe it's a practice or a photograph.
Do you have things that you maintained from Pakistan?
I used to go every year, normally see my family.
When I came after that, my family went to live in Islamabad.
But Islamabad is a very modern city.
It's like here.
So there's nothing backward, nothing.
It's very, very advanced.
It's like London, you can say.
It's a very advanced city.
Everything is new.
It's a brand new city.
And it's becoming better and better all the time.
So I always went there.
My kids went there.
So my children didn't have any bad experience from there.
They love to go and see the family.
Because my family is educated.
And they learned the good things, you know, nothing bad.
So I'm proud of it.
I fit there as good as what I fit here.
That's good.
That's a type of integration.
Question is, do you have any photographs or memorabilia, letters, documents
that you may be happy to put in the People's Collection website?
So the IGER is the People's Collection is a massive website
of stories of thousands of people that moved here from around the world
and different things.
And in amongst there, there'll be like a transcript of the interview,
some audio, maybe a picture of yourself.
Do you have anything you may want to add to that?
I've got to see.
I most probably have got some photographs, but not a very old one.
They're probably in the 70s and 80s.
Yeah, that's right.
Maybe like only those sort of photos, like with my kids,
or in a party, or in a house, or on birthdays, you know, something like that.
But nothing more than that.
What would you like to pass on to your children and grandchildren
that would sum up your life in the UK?
Actually, I have got eight grandchildren.
My one grandson, he's 27, and he's graduated.
He did a master two years ago in HR, and he works in London.
He works in Canadian E-Walk offices.
Is there something you would like to pass on to them, a message,
or if they come back to visit this interview in 20, 30 years,
anything you would like to say to them?
I won't be here.
This is why they were interviewing, anything you would like to say to them,
or mention to them?
My son, and my daughter, and my daughter is 23.
My daughter is 53.
And the eldest son is 31, my eldest daughter.
And then I have another daughter, and I have got a son.
My son got four daughters.
My daughter got three boys.
My son got four daughters, and my youngest son, he got just one boy, 19 years.
Is there something else you would like to add to all this?
And my husband is a very nice man, very, very nice man, religious and everything.
We've been to, we've been quite a lot of time.
We've been to Hunch, and we've been to Omra.
I've done three Hunch, and Mashallah.
After that, I've done eight journey to Omra.
Me and my husband, both of us.
It's not only religious tours we've done.
We've been to Cheikh, if you chime.
We've been to Spain once.
We've been touring everywhere.
We went to Scotland.
We went here and there, holidays.
It wasn't we only concentrated on our house.
We really had a good life, very, very nice life, Mashallah.
And now, four years now, my husband passed away.
That's it. I'm on my own now.
One of my, one son, and two of my grandchildren.
One my sons and his son, and one my daughters' son.
They want to, they don't want me to live on my own, so they are living with me.
And my grandson, who's 23, he's educated in computing in Bristol.
He has classes at home, you know, studying online.
And my daughter lives in Swinton.
Her husband, he's an engineer.
He works for BMW.
He's a robotic engineer, yes.
And my daughter, she works for, in doctor's surgery she works.
And my one son, he works for NHS.
And my daughter-in-law, she works for NHS.
My son works for NHS.
He drives, he, he go, what is that?
He go and collect organs and bloods and deliver to hospitals.
He live in Manchester.
And my youngest baby, I call baby, he's 43.
44, actually.
And he got a girl.
He's a mechanic.
He's, he got a girl.
That's my whole story.
Families moved across the UK quite a lot.
Yeah, my daughter live in Swinton.
She only moved over three years ago.
My son, he lives in Manchester.
But my one son, he lives with me.
Yeah.
Well, thank you very much.
Is there anything else you would like to put on the record?
I don't know.
It's what you think.
I think that's great.
I have missed anything.
No, we asked all the questions.
We talked about your experiences.
We talked a bit about heirlooms and mementos.
Actually, when I was years ago, I worked for, I'm forgetting things now.
I worked for GEMS, actually.
I had training in GEMS.
And I worked for hospital in medical service department.
And I worked for hospital as a bilingual, multi bilingual, actually.
I can speak Urdu, I can speak Punjabi, and I can speak English.
And I can speak Hindi as well.
And that is fluent.
I don't know what you thought about my English.
I don't know.
It seems like Asian English.
Like, you know, you think I speak fluent.
Like, you know, anybody can understand me.
Are there any mistakes?
I don't think so.
I can understand you.
So, yeah, thank you very much.
That's almost 40 minutes.
If there's nothing else.
Anything else?
No, we've gone through all the lists here about your experiences arriving.
We talked about, yeah, customs.
Yeah, we've gone through everything here.
Just a few questions from Roy.
How did you hear about A.J. Live and how was it introduced to yourself?
Actually, about more than 20 years ago, 25 years ago,
we used to go to a place called Asiana.
It was in a community house.
We used to go there that time.
We based that place.
Rahila used to run that.
And we named that place Asiana.
And after that, we used to go there and all.
And then we used to go to the one club.
You hear about the other one.
You know, so and so, so and so.
And then, now about more than 12, 13 years now,
since I've been going to A.J. Live.
You know, from there.
Did you know anything about A.J. Live before?
Or did you just arrive?
No, when I arrived there.
But I was an actor member.
I used to participate in everything.
Like, you know, there's the parties.
And it was anything, organizing, wherever we going.
I was the one, you know, always ready, my hands up.
But now I am a bit slow with age.
And I have got health issues, quite a few health issues.
So now I go, but not as much as, you know.
So what has it meant to you as a group, as a collective,
as a community project?
What has A.J. Live meant to you being a Newport resident?
Good.
I never thought to go anywhere else.
I don't want to.
I spent all my life here, actually.
You know, I was, I would say, more or less,
I was a teenager when I came to this country, you know.
And I grew up, I learned everything afterward,
you know, after I got married.
Before I didn't know much about it.
I mean, that was my experience.
I learned everything, anything and everything from here,
from people, with my life experience, with my partner.
Because my partner was a great partner.
That's it. Thank you very much.
Thank you very much.